The acquisition process.
We have now defined our requirements for the new person.
Here is the process I would suggest you follow to
acquire your new talent in six easy steps.
First off, always follow your company's process,
so talk to your manager and/or HR, human resources,
to learn and understand the hiring process.
I am never suggesting you go around the company process.
In the event that you do not have a process or the
process allows you to be creative, here are the steps I recommend.
If you don't think about what you need in a new employee ahead of time,
you will have a much harder time knowing when you find him or her,
so follow my simple process.
Step 1, since we have our job requirements completed,
we post your requirements either through using
existing company practices or on Indeed,
LinkedIn or other social or business portals.
By the way,
I will be going through very detailed examples of each one
of my six steps in the following slides.
This is an overview.
Next, step 2, conduct phone interviews.
As you're responses come in, rank them against your requirements,
believe me, you will get some that aren't even close to what you need,
no worries, that is expected.
Now when you find the right candidates that even come close,
remember no one walks on water, then put them in the phone interview pile.
Next step 3, conduct face to face interviews.
If they satisfy your phone interview,
then set up a time for them to come into your office for an interview.
Step 4, follow on interviews.
Usually one interview is not enough and you may need to do a deep dive and ask
some more deep and interesting and provocative questions.
Step 5, selection.
Okay, now you need to pick one.
And lastly, step 6, finalize paperwork.
You're going to have to go to HR or other company paperwork processes to
actually make this happen and get the offer letter out.
Now let's prepare for our first interview.
Step 1, post job and collect candidates,
that is you are collecting resumes from the posting sources.
You already have your requirements,
so this step will be pretty easy and you're done.
Next, post the job with HR or online sites and employment services.
Next, screen the candidates,
screen their resumes to the ones that make sense to talk to.
Create a list of the candidates you would like to call.
You may get a ton, read each one,
and use your judgment which ones you want to call based on the requirements.
Sometimes you might find they don't meet the requirements on paper,
so to speak,
but other experiences on their resume might give you a
gut feel to move them to the next step.
So watch out for the resumes that don't quite meet your requirements,
but still look intriguing and may offer value you have not thought of.
Don't settle for less, at least not yet.
If you only have subpar candidates, well keep looking.
The last thing you want is to hire someone you really
don't want or just can't do the job.
That new hire, by the way,
will consume your time and be a morale killer to others.
Review results with your team.
Always be inclusive with your team, share your findings,
and now that you have a list of say five candidates for in person interviews.
Next, keep all documentation and notes.
I'll keep hammering on this, this is very important.
Lastly,
our outcome of the step is a list of qualified candidates to call on the phone.
Okay, now let's call them.
Okay step 2, conduct the phone interviews.
The whole point of the phone interview is to see if they
qualify for a face to face interview.
Remember, face to face interviews takes much more time and money,
so we want to use the phone interview as a tool to prequalify the candidates.
In other words,
what are the minimum things you need to know in order to either end the
call and say thanks or move them to the next step,
which is the in person interview.
Now be patient.
Don't jump to a face-to-face right now, have patience.
If you go right to face-to-face, I've found over time it just wastes your time.
This step is important to save your time and the interviewee's time as well.
Prepare a list of questions that will enable you to quickly,
maybe in 15 minutes to 30 minutes tops,
to know whether you want to proceed with them.
Remember the goal of the phone interview is this,
do they meet your threshold of requirements for an in person interview?
What are the got to have requirements?
Have a list of deal breaker questions.
Don't waste your time or the time of the respondent with
random questions or plain chit chat, get right down to it.
Okay, conduct a phone interview and take notes.
So start calling.
Begin with pleasantries and be upbeat in your demeanor.
Begin with - may I ask you a few questions and then move
on with your deal breaker questions.
If enough are answered to your liking,
they will become a candidate for an in person interview,
if not, they're out.
Ask clear and concise questions that tie specifically
to those got to have requirements.
You want to get down to specifics quickly.
No need for vague or fuzzy questions on a phone interview,
maybe leave that for the face to face.
Here's some examples of maybe got to haves.
For example, I need 3+ years of.
NET or C# experience.
I may need a 4 year degree, maybe computer related.
Also, salary expectations, this is important,
if they want twice what you can budget for,
you might consider moving on since neither one of you will be satisfied.
Of course this is just a short list and your got to haves will be much longer.
Next, review the results with your team.
Always be inclusive with your team and share your findings.
Okay,
now that you have a list of say maybe three to five
candidates for in person interviews, let's see what your team thinks.
Also, keep all documentation and notes, you never know.
In today's corporate and litigious world, you may need your notes, so keep them.
So now that we have our phone interviews complete or maybe even most of them,
and we have a short list of in person interview candidates,
we can move to the next step, which is the face to face interview.
So the outcome of this step is a list of qualified candidates,
they've met your got to haves,
now they can move on to the face to face interviews. Now if you don't have any, keep on looking.